
--- Page 136 ---
135
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority
In all cases watch out for and give plenty of room to:
	 pedestrians who may be crossing the approach and exit roads,
	 traffic crossing in front of you on the roundabout, especially vehicles 
intending to leave by the next exit,
	 traffic that may be straddling lanes or positioned incorrectly,
	 motorcyclists,
	 cyclists and horse riders who may stay in the left-hand lane and signal 
right if they intend to continue round the roundabout,
	 long vehicles (including those towing trailers), which might have to take 
a different course approaching or on the roundabout because of their 
length. Watch out for their signals.
REMEMBER
Conditions at roundabouts may vary. Exercise caution at all times. In 
particular, be aware of traffic signs, traffic lights, road markings and 
traffic coming from your right when approaching roundabouts.
135
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

--- Page 137 ---
Section 10:
Parking
This section covers the rules on parking safely.
Parking
General rules
	 Where possible, park facing in the direction of traffic flow.
	 Park close to, and parallel with, the kerb or edge of the road, except at 
any location where straight or angled parking bays are marked out on the 
surface of the road.
	 Where a parking bay is marked out on a road, you must park your vehicle 
fully within the parking space.
	 Apply the handbrake.
	 Switch off the engine. 
	 Leave the vehicle in first gear or reverse, or, in the case of an automatic, 
select P.
	 Before opening any doors, check for other road users nearby, in particular 
motorcyclists, cyclists and pedestrians.
	 Open your doors only when you need to and keep them open only for as 
long as necessary.
	 Get out of your vehicle only when it is safe and you and your passengers 
are not blocking other road users. 
	 Passengers should exit on the kerbside.
	 Lock your vehicle as you leave it.
	 You should not leave headlights on when parked.
136
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

--- Page 138 ---
How to make sure your vehicle is parked safely
Make sure you do not interfere with normal traffic flow and that your vehicle 
does not disturb, block or endanger other road users.
Dos 3
Don’ts 7
Do park as close as possible to the kerb 
or edge of the road.
Don’t park opposite another vehicle on a 
narrow road.
Do make sure the sides of your vehicle 
are parallel to the kerb or edge, unless a 
traffic sign indicates otherwise.
Don’t double park.
Do park facing in the same direction as 
the traffic.
Don’t park at roadworks.
Do make sure your vehicle can be seen 
at night.
Don’t park at the entrance or exit of a 
fire station, Garda station, ambulance 
station or hospital.
Do park courteously, without blocking 
other road users’ views of a traffic signal 
or the road ahead.
Don’t park where you would block other 
road users’ views of a traffic signal or the 
road ahead.
Do park where you would not block the 
entrance to a property unless you have 
the owner’s permission.
Don’t park where parking is forbidden 
by traffic signs or road markings (see 
section 6).
Don’t leave headlights switched on when 
parking at the side of the road, or just off 
the side of the road.
REMEMBER
Drivers can quickly become dazzled and disorientated by headlights 
of parked or stopped vehicles. If you need to have lights on in these 
circumstances, you should use only ‘side’ or ‘parking’ lights. You should 
not leave headlights on when parked.
137
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

--- Page 139 ---
The following traffic signs and road markings show where parking is not allowed 
or is allowed only at certain times.
Traffic signs
These signs and their information plates show that you can park only during 
certain periods (sign 1) or outside certain periods (sign 2).
The sign below shows a clearway – an area of road that must be kept clear for 
moving traffic during certain times of the day (usually busy periods). The times 
when stopping or parking is prohibited are shown on an information plate under 
the sign.
Other vehicles may stop during these times only if they are waiting in a line of 
traffic, but they are not allowed to park, even if disc or metered parking is 
normally available.
Sign 1
Parking permitted
Sign 2
Parking prohibited
Clearway
138
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

--- Page 140 ---
Road markings
This single yellow line usually has an upright information plate nearby. 
Together, the road marking and information plate mean you must not park 
during the times shown.
The double yellow lines mean no parking at any time.
139
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec10_parking_p140_0.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec10_parking_p140_1.jpx]
