
--- Page 51 ---
Children in motor vehicles
You must not leave infants or young children on their own in a motor vehicle, even if 
you are only away for a short time. The children may face a number of hazards, such as: 
	 a fire breaking out,
	 difficulty in breathing on a warm day (if all windows are closed), and
	 being trapped in electric windows, which could result in serious injury or death.
Animals in motor vehicles
Animals should be securely contained when traveling in a vehicle using an 
appropriate harness or cage to avoid injury to the animal or to other passengers.
You should never leave animals alone in vehicles. It is cruel and unsafe and can 
result in injury to the animal and damage to your vehicle.
Using a mobile phone
You must not drive a vehicle or ride a motorbike while using a hand-held mobile 
phone. It is an offence, for which you may receive a fixed charge and up to 5 
penalty points.
You must not send a text message or email or read a text message or email 
from a mobile phone while driving a vehicle or riding a motorbike. It is an 
offence for which a person will face a compulsory court appearance and a fine to 
be determined by the judge. There is also the possibility of a prison term of up 
to 3 months to be imposed in cases of multiple offences in a 12-month period. 
There is no option to take the lesser penalty of penalty points for this offence. 
You may only use your mobile phone when you are driving if you are phoning 
999 or 112, or you are responding to another type of genuine emergency. 
Cyclists should never use a mobile phone when cycling and pedestrians should 
be careful when using one.
Personal entertainment systems 
As a road user, you should avoid using personal entertainment systems through 
earphones. These systems – for example, personal radios and MP3 players – 
can distract you, and may prove dangerous when driving or crossing the road.
Cyclists in particular should avoid these systems, as they rely on their hearing 
while on the road.
If you do use a personal or in-car system, play it at a volume that does not 
distract or prevent you from hearing emergency sirens or car horns.
50
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

--- Page 52 ---
Section 5: 
Good driving practice
This section describes how to do the most common driving manoeuvres safely 
and with consideration for other road users. It focuses on:
	 moving off,
	 your position on the road,
	 changing traffic lanes,
	 overtaking,
	 reversing,
	 u-turns,
	 slowing down or stopping, 
	 towing,
	 day time running lights,
	 driving at night, and
	 using a horn.
Moving off
	 Before moving off, carry out the following safety checks:
•	 check that all doors, the bonnet and the boot are closed;
•	 make sure your seat and head restraint are properly adjusted;
•	 make sure your rear view mirrors are clean and properly adjusted; and
•	 check that all safety belts (yours and those of your front-seat and back-
seat passengers) are fastened. 
	 Before moving off from the kerb, you must take the appropriate all 
around observations, check your mirrors and signal, just before moving 
off check the blind spot to the relevant side, over the right shoulder if 
moving off to the right or over the left shoulder if moving to the left.
51
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

--- Page 53 ---
	 When the way is clear, move out and adjust your speed to that of the 
normal safe and legal flow of traffic.
	 Always look in your mirror but remember that there are blind spots, so 
always check over your shoulders as well. Traffic and pedestrians may be 
coming up beside your vehicle. When moving off from a stationary 
position check your blind spots by looking around you.
	 When you are ready to move off, check your mirrors and signal your 
intention to move out into traffic.
Your position on the road
Make sure you drive your vehicle far enough to the left to allow traffic to safely 
pass or overtake on the right, but not so far to the left that you are driving on a 
cycle lane or blocking or endangering cyclists or pedestrians.
52
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec5_good_driving_practice_p53_0.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec5_good_driving_practice_p53_1.jpx]

--- Page 54 ---
What to do if you need to change your road position
	 If you are overtaking, turning right or passing pedestrians, cyclists, horse 
riders, other road users or parked vehicles, make sure it is safe to do so.
	 Always check in your mirror for any vehicles coming up on your right or 
overtaking from behind, and don’t forget to check your blind spots.
	 Give a clear signal to warn traffic in good time of your intentions and 
proceed.
Taking care with buses and pedestrians
You should allow signalling buses back into the stream of traffic after they 
let passengers on and off. Be especially careful of pedestrians getting on and 
off buses and of children near schools. When driving near schools, always 
be prepared to stop. The RSA advises you to drive your vehicle in a defensive 
manner, be prepared to stop, sound the horn and brake. Always expect the 
unexpected.
Taking care with cyclists
If you are at a junction where there is an advanced stop line for cyclists, you 
should allow cyclists to move off ahead of you.
When turning left, all drivers, especially drivers of heavy goods vehicles, must 
watch out for cyclists and motorcyclists going ahead or turning.
53
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec5_good_driving_practice_p54_0.jpx]

--- Page 55 ---
On left turns, watch out for cyclists and mopeds close to the kerb in front of you 
or coming up on your left. Do not overtake a cyclist as you approach a junction 
if you are turning left, as the cyclist might be continuing straight ahead.
You should give extra space when overtaking a cyclist, as they may need to 
avoid uneven road surfaces and obstacles. This is particularly important on wet 
or windy days.
Sharing the road with cyclists
Correct road positioning will allow a cyclist to move safely and competently on 
the road network.
Drivers should be aware that cyclists may need to change direction from the 
normal secondary position on the road (left side of the road) to a more primary 
riding position (centre of the road) in order to:
	 get the best view of the road and junctions ahead.
	 increase visibility for approaching traffic, especially where a driver’s view 
may be blocked.
	 turn left or right, enter a roundabout, change lanes or approach a bend.
Before changing position on the road, cyclists should ‘look, signal in good 
time and look again’ to ensure that it is safe to proceed. Where a cyclist is not 
confident in taking up the ‘primary’ position, it may be safer to get off the bike 
and cross the roadway on foot where it is safer.
Drivers, always check and give extra space to cyclists, as they may need to 
change position to safely avoid uneven road surfaces and obstacles.
In speed zones of up to 50kmh you should keep a distance of at least 1 metre.
In speed zones of over 50kmh you should keep a distance of at least 1.5 metres.
Give the space to ride safe.
54
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec5_good_driving_practice_p55_0.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec5_good_driving_practice_p55_1.jpx]

--- Page 56 ---
Changing traffic lanes
Don’t move from one traffic lane to another without good reason.
You must give way to traffic already in the lane into which you are moving.
How to change lanes safely
	 If you have good reason to change lanes, use your mirrors and check in 
plenty of time to ensure that the way is clear. To check your blind spot 
when travelling at speed, take a quick sideways glance to check the 
position of a vehicle that may have disappeared from your view in the 
mirror.
	 Signal your intention and change lane when it is clear and safe to do so.
	 When in a lane or approaching a junction, obey any road signs or 
markings (usually arrows) indicating the direction that traffic in those 
lanes must take.
REMEMBER
Signalling does not give you the right of way.
55
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec5_good_driving_practice_p56_0.jpx]

--- Page 57 ---
Overtaking
Only overtake if it is safe for you and other road users. Be particularly careful of 
features that may hinder your view of the road ahead, such as hills, dips, bends, 
bridges, pedestrian crossings or roads narrowing. Pay attention to the rules on 
road signs or markings (continuous, broken, single, double white lines) covered 
in Section 6.
How to overtake safely
Make sure the road ahead is clear so you have enough distance to overtake and 
get back to your own side of the road without forcing any other road user to 
move to avoid you.
	 Never directly follow another overtaking vehicle.
	 Give way to faster traffic already overtaking from behind.
	 Before overtaking check that the way is clear, check in your mirror and 
check your blind spots to ensure another vehicle is not approaching from 
behind. Give your signal in good time, move out when it is safe to do so, 
accelerate and overtake with the minimum of delay.
	 When you are well past, check the mirror, signal and gradually move in 
again making sure not to cut across the vehicle you have passed.
	 Take extra care when overtaking a vehicle displaying a ‘LONG VEHICLE’ 
sign. This means that the vehicle is at least 13 metres long and you will 
need extra road length to pass it and safely return to the left-hand side of 
the road.
	 You must not break the speed limit, even when overtaking.
56
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec5_good_driving_practice_p57_0.jpx]

--- Page 58 ---
REMEMBER
You must normally overtake on the right. However, you are allowed to 
overtake on the left in the situations listed below.
You may overtake on the left when
	 You want to go straight ahead when the driver in front of you has moved 
out and signalled that they intend to turn right.
	 You have signalled that you intend to turn left.
	 Traffic in both lanes is moving slowly but traffic in the left-hand lane is 
moving more quickly than the right-hand lane – for example, in slow-
moving stop-start traffic.
You must not overtake when
	 You are at or near a pelican crossing, zebra crossing or at pedestrian 
signals.
	 A traffic sign or road marking prohibits it.
	 You are approaching a junction.
	 You are on the approach to a corner, bend, dip in the road, hump-back 
bridge, brow of a hill or on a narrow road.
	 You are in the left-hand lane of a dual carriageway or motorway when 
traffic is moving at normal speed.
	 It would cause danger or inconvenience to another road user.
What to do when somebody overtakes you
	 Continue at the same pace, unless it becomes unsafe to do so.
	 Keep as near to the left as is safe.
	 Do not accelerate.
	 Be alert in case the overtaking vehicle suddenly pulls back in front of you.
57
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

--- Page 59 ---
Reversing
How to reverse safely
	 Check for nearby pedestrians and traffic by looking carefully all around, in 
front of and behind you, over both your shoulders, directly through your 
rear window and in your mirrors.
	 Take special care where small children may be gathered, such as schools, 
playgrounds, residential roads, car parks or your own driveway.
	 If your view is restricted, ask for help when reversing.
	 Give way to other traffic or pedestrians.
	 When reversing from a major road onto a minor road, wait until it is 
safe to reverse slowly far enough into the side road to allow you to take 
up the correct position on the left-hand side when rejoining the major 
road.
	 Take extra care when reversing if it is dark.
	 If you are in doubt, get out of your vehicle and check the area.
	 You must not reverse from a minor road onto a major road as it is unsafe 
to do so.
	 When parking in your own driveway or in a car park, you should, where 
possible, reverse ‘in’ which enables you to safely drive out.
U-turns
You must not make a U-turn unless traffic conditions make it completely safe to 
do so.
	 Check there are no signs or road markings prohibiting a U-turn, for 
example a continuous centre white line.
	 Check that the road is not one way.
	 Look for a safe place, where you can see clearly in all directions.
	 Give way to all other road users.
	 Check carefully for cyclists and motorcyclists.
58
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

--- Page 60 ---
	 Do not delay or prevent pedestrians from crossing safely.
	 Make sure there is sufficient room to complete your manoeuvre safely 
and smoothly.
(See Section 9 for rules and guidelines on turning)
Slowing down or stopping at the side of a road
	 Check in your mirror to make sure you can slow down and stop safely.
	 You must signal your intention when changing course and pulling in to stop.
	 In addition to your indication you can signal your intention to slow down 
either through the brake lights or by moving your right arm up and down 
outside your vehicle window (shown below) if you think your brake lights 
might not be seen or might not be working. If they are not working, have 
them repaired as soon as possible.
No U-turn
59
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec5_good_driving_practice_p60_0.jpx]

--- Page 61 ---
	 You should not leave your headlights on when stopping at the side of the 
road, including laybys or private property. If you need to leave your lights 
on, you should use your ‘side’ or ‘parking’ lights only.
	 Use a traffic lay-by if one is provided or pull in and stop close to the left-
hand edge of the road.
Towing
If you are towing another vehicle or a trailer (including a boat trailer or a 
caravan), remember the following points.
	 Make sure the tow bar or other towing device is strong enough and is 
attached securely so that it does not break or become loose when used.
	 Make sure the breakaway brake or secondary coupling is in place and 
secured.
A ‘breakaway brake’ attached to a trailer is a braking device that can 
automatically stop the trailer if it becomes detached from the towing vehicle 
while moving. A ‘secondary coupling’ is usually a safety chain or wire rope or 
other similar connection which ensures the trailer stays attached to its towing 
vehicle if the main coupling fails or becomes detached. A secondary coupling is 
not needed if the trailer is equipped with a breakaway brake. Further 
information on these devices is available on www.rsa.ie. 
	 Do not allow a distance of more than 4.5 metres (about 15 feet) between 
the vehicles or the vehicle and the trailer. 
Towing (drawing) 
vehicle
Trailer
Jockey wheel
Tow bar
Tow ball
Breakaway brake 
Draw bar
Trailer 
coupling
60
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec5_good_driving_practice_p61_0.jpx]

--- Page 62 ---
	 If more than 1.5 metres separates the vehicles, use some warning device 
such as a white flag of at least 30 centimetres squared to draw attention 
to the tow bar.
	 If you need to tow another vehicle using a rope or strap – for example, a 
broken down vehicle – you should only do so to the nearest convenient 
safe place of repair.
	 If towing a vehicle that has its own steering gear, make sure somebody 
remains in that vehicle to take charge of the steering.
	 If towing a vehicle, the person who steers the towed vehicle must hold a 
licence to drive the same category of vehicle.
	 Make sure a trailer is fitted with brakes if it has a Maximum Authorised 
Mass (MAM) of more than 750kg or is more than half the laden weight 
of the drawing vehicle (whichever is lower). This includes a parking 
brake and a breakaway brake. Older trailers that don’t have a 
breakaway brake must have a secondary coupling (a chain or wire rope) 
fitted instead.
	 A combination of vehicles or an articulated vehicle more than 13 metres 
long must display a ‘LONG VEHICLE’ sign or signs on the back of the last 
trailer.
Loads must be safely distributed and securely tied down. You should avoid 
carrying loads that extend over the side of the trailer while it’s being towed. 
Loads may extend over the side and rear of trailers provided the following limits 
are not exceeded:
61
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec5_good_driving_practice_p62_0.jpx]

--- Page 63 ---
62
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority
	 Loads (other than poles intended for use by telephone or electricity 
services) must not project more than 3 metres beyond the rearmost part 
of a trailer.
	 Loads overhanging to the rear by more than 1 metre must be marked 
during the day with a red flag or cloth which is at least 300 millimetres 
square (about 12 inches square). However, at night time, overhanging 
loads must be fitted with a red reflector and a red light.
	 Loads (other than loose agricultural produce which is not baled or in 
crates) must not project more than 300 millimetres (about 12 inches 
square) over the outermost point of the side of the trailer. At night, these 
loads must be fitted with lights showing a white light to the front and a 
red light to the rear. These lights must be placed as close as possible to 
the outermost point of the load.
	 If possible, loads should be evenly distributed across the trailer and 
positioned in such a way as to keep the nose weight (that is, the weight 
exerted by the trailer drawbar on the coupling) within the recommended 
limits for the drawing vehicle. Consult the owner’s handbook for further 
details. If you have to carry a load that cannot be evenly distributed, 
make sure it is properly restrained and that individual axles or the 
drawbar are not overloaded. You might have to reduce the overall load to 
achieve this.
	 When towing a trailer, the maximum speed at which the vehicle can 
travel may be different from the posted speed limit. Please see page 114 
for more information.
Further information on towing different loads safely and calculating the towing 
capacity of a vehicle is available on www.rsa.ie.
Driving at night
Make sure your lights, indicators, reflectors and number plate lighting are clean 
and in good working order so that you can see clearly and be seen at all times. 
A clean windscreen is especially important when driving at night.
You must drive at a speed that allows you to stop within the distance covered 
by your lights. Assuming good driving conditions on an unlit road, the 
headlights of a typical car let you see for about 100 metres. Dipped lights will 
let you see for about 30 metres and a car travelling at 100km/h will cover this 
distance in about a second.

--- Page 64 ---
63
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority
Keep your headlights adjusted properly. If they are out 
of line, they are less effective and may dazzle oncoming 
traffic, even when dipped.
Even with the best headlights, you can see less at night 
than during the day. Pedestrians and unlit bicycles are 
extremely difficult to see in the dark, particularly if you 
have to deal with the glare of oncoming lights.
Some junctions are marked with special coloured studs 
or delineator posts to help road users to see where a 
junction is as they approach it at night or during periods 
of poor visibility.
Daytime running lights
‘Daytime running lights’ refers to driving with dipped headlights during 
daytime. The use of dipped headlights can help reduce the number of deaths 
and serious injuries on our roads.
Make sure to turn on your dipped head lights at lighting up time as daytime 
running lights are not suitable or safe to use at night time.
If your vehicle is not fitted with daytime running lights, you should drive with 
your dipped headlights on during the daytime.
Junction delineator post

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec5_good_driving_practice_p64_0.jpx]

--- Page 65 ---
When to use headlights 
If conditions require you to use headlights to drive safely, you must use them. 
Use dipped headlights at night or main beam headlights as appropriate. When 
in doubt, turn them on. Make sure that the red lights and number plate lighting 
at the back of your vehicle are working.
Use dipped headlights:
	 just after the beginning (dusk) and before the end (dawn) of lighting-up hours;
	 as long as they are needed to let you see clearly;
	 when stopped in traffic;
	 when meeting other traffic;
	 in built-up areas where there is good street lighting;
	 on continuously lit roads outside built-up areas;
	 when following behind another vehicle;
	 where there is dense fog, falling snow or heavy rain;
	 when daylight is fading; and
	 generally to avoid inconveniencing other traffic.
It is good practice to use dipped headlights or to dim or dip your lights instead 
of using only sidelights in built-up areas where there is good street lighting.
	 Use main beam headlights in situations, places and times outside of 
those listed above.
	 Use fog lights only during dense fog or falling snow. You must turn them 
off at all other times.
	 It is recommended  that, if stopped (other than in traffic), you do not 
leave your headlights on and switch to your ‘side’ or ‘parking’ lights 
instead. You should not leave headlights on when parked.
What to do if you are dazzled by another vehicle’s headlights
	 Slow down and stop if necessary.
	 Always watch for pedestrians or cyclists on your side of the road.
	 If the dazzle is from an oncoming vehicle, avoid it by looking towards the 
verge (edge of your side of the road) until the vehicle has passed. If the 
dazzle is from a vehicle behind you and reflected in your mirror, operate 
the night-driving mode on the mirror.
64
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority
