
--- Page 66 ---
Driving carefully behind other vehicles
Section 8 covers the importance of keeping a safe distance behind vehicles in 
front of you. In particular, don’t drive on the tail lights of the vehicle in front. It 
gives a false sense of security and may lure you into driving too close or too 
fast, or both. If you see red vehicle lights in front of you, dip your headlights to 
avoid dazzling the driver of the vehicle ahead.
Using a horn
Only use a horn to:
	 warn other road users of on-coming danger; or
	 make them aware of your presence for safety reasons when reasonably 
necessary.
Remember, the horn does not give you the right of way.
Do not use a horn in a built-up area between 11.30 at night and 7 in the 
morning unless there is a traffic emergency.
REMEMBER
You must drive having due regard to other road users.
65
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p66_0.jpx]

--- Page 67 ---
Section 6:
Traffic signs and road markings
You must know what traffic signs and road markings mean before you attempt 
to drive on a public road. This section focuses on the signs that you as a driver 
will come across most often. Sections 21 to 25 covers a range of the most 
important signs currently used on Irish roads. 
You must know and understand these signs and respond correctly when you see 
them on the road. 
Traffic signs and roadway markings are divided into three broad categories:
	 Regulatory,
	 Warning, and
	 Information.
Sometimes signs from different categories are used together to improve road 
safety. 
Different types of signs are used for bus and cycle lanes, motorways and 
railway crossings and bridges. There is also a special series of warning signs for 
roadworks. These are all outlined at the end of this section.
Regulatory signs
These indicate what you must do under road traffic law, so all road users must 
obey them. Regulatory signs are divided into a number of groups: 
	 Upright signs;
	 Road markings; and
	 Traffic lights.
This section concentrates on regulatory upright signs and road markings. 
Section 7 covers traffic lights in detail.
66
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

--- Page 68 ---
Upright signs
What they look like:
These generally come in two formats. Their shape can be circular, octagonal, 
triangular or rectangular, as shown in the examples below:
	 a white background with a red border and black letters, symbols or 
numbers, and
	 a blue background with white symbols or letters.
Please note that it is a fixed charge offence of €60 to ignore the ‘No entry to 
vehicles’ sign pictured above.
Zonal restriction  
– no parking of 
large vehicles
Yield
Yield
Stop
Turn left
Tram lane  
on right
Start of  
cycle track
Contra flow  
bus lane
No entry to 
vehicles
Parking prohibited
100km/h
No entry
67
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p68_0.jpx]

--- Page 69 ---
The sign below applies to drivers of HGVs and large non-passenger vehicles. It 
means that vehicles with the number of axles shown (or more) cannot use the 
road during the times shown without a permit. You should check the 
information plate or the permit to confirm the time limits and any restrictions 
that apply.
The signs below apply to all drivers of vehicles which may exceed the weight, 
width or length restrictions on certain roads. You must comply with such signs. 
It is an offence to proceed past such signs if your vehicle exceeds the maximum 
weight, width or length. This offence attracts a fixed charge of €60.
No entry to goods vehicles (by 
reference to number of axles)
Information plate
maximum width 
sign
maximum height 
sign
maximum design 
gross vehicle 
weight sign 
(safety)
maximum axle 
loading weight 
sign
68
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p69_0.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p69_1.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p69_2.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p69_3.jpx]

--- Page 70 ---
Stop and Yield signs
As you can see from the diagram, the upright Stop sign is a red octagon with a 
white border. It is the only regulatory sign of this shape. Stop signs appear at 
junctions with major roads. If you approach a Stop sign, you must stop 
completely before entering the major road, no matter how quiet it might 
appear.
The upright Yield sign shown is just one version of this sign. Other versions are 
the same shape and colour but might say ‘Yield Right of Way’, or ‘Géill Slí’. If 
you see a Yield sign on the road, usually near a junction or roundabout, you 
must give way to any traffic on a major road ahead and you must not proceed 
onto the main road until it is safe to do so. Make sure you allow enough time to 
complete your manoeuvre. It is better to be safe than sorry.
Traffic lane control signs
These traffic lane control signs will be found on national roads or motorways. 
When the signs are operational, the amber lights at the top and bottom will 
flash in turn.
Stop
Yield
Géill Slí
69
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

--- Page 71 ---
A green arrow pointing down means the lane is open and you can proceed in 
that lane.
A red X means the lane is closed. You must stop. You must not pass this sign. It 
has the same effect as a stop sign.
A green arrow pointing to the left means you must move into the left-hand lane. 
In doing so you must observe the general rules of the road about safely 
changing lanes.
A green arrow pointing to the right means you must move into the right-hand 
lane. In doing so you must observe the general rules of the road relating to 
safely changing lanes.
Where a driver proceeds beyond one of the above traffic lane control signs other 
than in accordance with the sign or without yielding, they will be liable for a 
fixed charge of €60.
Go (lane open)
Stop (lane closed)
Move into the left-hand lane
Move into the right-hand lane
70
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p71_0.jpx]

--- Page 72 ---
One-way streets
When you are approaching a one-way street, you may see one of two regulatory 
signs. If you are at the entrance to a one-way street, you will see the ‘Proceed 
Straight Ahead’ regulatory sign. If you are approaching the ‘wrong’ end of a 
one-way street, you will see the regulatory road markings shown below to 
indicate ‘No Entry’ and you must not enter past those markings.
You may also see an upright ‘No Entry’ sign with the road markings.
Driving in a one-way street
Even though all traffic on a one-way street is travelling in the same direction, 
you should still drive on the left-hand side. You may leave the left-hand side 
only if you intend to overtake or turn right up ahead. You may drive on either 
side of a traffic island, but take note of arrow markings on the road.
Only change lanes if you have to. If you have to change lanes, check your 
mirrors and any blind spots for any traffic coming up behind you or overtaking 
you. When the way is clear, signal your intention and move, giving way to any 
traffic already in the lane.
No entry to vehicles
No entry
Straight ahead
71
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p72_0.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p72_1.jpx]

--- Page 73 ---
72
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority
When turning right from a one-way street, drive as close as you can to the right-
hand side.
Remember that the road at the end of a one-way street may be two-way. You 
may see the warning sign below if it is.
Streets for pedestrians
The regulatory sign below shows that the street is closed to all road users 
except pedestrians at the time shown on the information plate underneath.
Road markings
Road markings are a traffic sign in the form and design of a marking on the 
surface of the road. They have the same status as upright signs. Road users 
must obey these road markings.
The diagrams below show the most common types of road marking and what 
they mean.
Two-way traffic
Pedestrianised 
street

--- Page 74 ---
73
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority
Road markings
What they mean
Single or double 
continuous white 
lines along the 
centre of the road
These divide two lanes of traffic traveling 
in opposite directions. All traffic must 
keep to the left of the line (except in an 
emergency or for access).
Longer white 
lines or shorter 
gaps between 
the lines along 
the centre of the 
road
These divide two lanes of traffic traveling 
in opposite directions. These warning 
lines alert drivers to hazards such as 
restricted vision, approach to a junction, 
approach to a roundabout, a hill, crests, 
bends and continuous white line ahead. 
You must not cross them unless it is safe 
to do so.
Short broken white 
lines along the 
centre of the road
These divide two lanes of traffic travelling 
in opposite directions. You must not cross 
them unless it is safe to do so.
Double broken 
white lines along 
the centre of the 
road
These divide two lanes of traffic traveling 
in opposite directions. These alert drivers 
to continuous white lines a short distance 
ahead. As a driver, you must not cross 
them unless it is safe to do so.
A broken white 
line with a single 
white line along 
the centre of the 
road
These divide two lanes of traffic traveling 
in opposite directions. The driver must 
obey the line that is nearest to them. In 
this picture, the driver in the car must 
remain to the left of the continuous 
white line. 
A single broken 
yellow line along 
the side of the 
road
This road contains a hard shoulder, which is 
normally only for pedestrians and cyclists.
If a driver wants to allow a vehicle behind 
them to overtake, they may pull in to 
the hard shoulder briefly (but  do not 
continue driving in the hard shoulder) 
as long as no pedestrians or cyclists 
are already using it and no junctions or 
entrances are nearby. 
Different rules exist for hard shoulders on 
motorways. See Section 11 for details.

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p74_0.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p74_1.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p74_2.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p74_3.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p74_4.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p74_5.jpx]

--- Page 75 ---
74
Údarás Um Shábháilteacht Ar Bhóithre
Road Safety Authority
Road markings
What they mean
A broken white Yield 
line crossing the 
left-hand lane. 
A white triangular 
Yield symbol may 
also be provided 
with the Yield line.
The driver must give right-of-way to 
any traffic on a major road ahead. 
The yield line usually appears with an 
upright Yield sign.
A continuous white 
Stop line crossing 
the left-hand lane. 
The word STOP may 
also be written near 
or at the Stop line.
The driver must come to a complete 
stop before entering a major road. 
The stop line sometimes appears with 
an upright Stop sign.
An advanced stop 
line for cyclists, 
which is in front 
of the stop line for 
other traffic
Cyclists may position themselves in 
front of other traffic at a junction 
controlled by traffic lights.
The motor vehicle driver must wait 
behind the first white line they reach 
and not cross into the shaded area. 
The driver must also give cyclists 
enough time and space to move off 
when the lights turn green.
A turning box 
showing a white 
arrow in a white 
edged box, found at 
junctions controlled 
by traffic lights
This shows where to position a vehicle 
if you want to take a right turn. Do 
not proceed into the box through a 
red light.
If oncoming traffic means you cannot 
take a right turn immediately, you 
must wait in the box until you can 
safely take the turn.

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p75_0.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p75_1.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p75_2.jpx]

[IMAGE EXTRACTED: sec6_signs_p75_3.jpx]
